different people are using the word
atheism with different meanings and
one of the reasons why debates within
atheism
are often so embittered and vitriolic is
that they want to insist no no no
only my definition is the true and
correct meaning of the word
rather than just saying look for this
discussion to proceed
we just have to say okay there's atheism
definition one
and atheism definition 2 we come to some
mutual understanding
and then move on to more pragmatic
considerations
like what do we do next there are
some atheists who look at the type of
cultural festival you see on your screen
here
and they see something that should be
abolished
they look at this and think well ideally
a hundred years from now or 200 years
from now
this type of religious festival and
religious ceremony
will have disappeared from the world it
will have become a thing of the past
it will be something talked about in
history lessons in the academic
study of cultural anthropology but it
will not be something that people
believe in
it will not be something people practice
the songs being sung here
to the monotheistic god the ceremonies
worshiping that god
will actually disappear from society
some
atheists think of the future of atheism
that way
some atheists think of the end point or
goal that they're working towards as
their of their activism
as being the abolition of this type of
ceremony
and then there are some atheists and
these people don't have a separate name
they don't have a separate category they
don't self-identify as a separate
movement
there are some atheists who vocally and
actively say
that they would preserve this type of
ritual
they would preserve the songs they would
actually preserve
all of the cultural trappings the
institutions
the architecture the festival
of islam christianity hinduism of all
the religions
they would preserve it all they're
only interested in a sort of inward
transformation
of the people from being believers to
unbelievers
that people will change from having a
religious mentality
to having a secular mentality is it good
to have a cultural celebration
i think it is it seems that you think it
is now if we were starting afresh within
our culture would i say i tell you what
let's build it upon some archaic
religion that nobody believes anymore
of course i wouldn't say that would i
but we're not starting afresh we're
starting on a position with a whole lot
of history
and when i look back at that christmas
celebration i see a whole load of depth
and richness that has the culture that
is so difficult to create from fresh
cloth
you talk about these other cultures i
admire people actually
totally contrary to what you say i
admire people in these other cultures
that can take
a secular path in a day-to-day life who
can lose their religion and will say
that is what i've done because like you
say that's not an easy thing for them to
do
within the societies in which they live
it's a lot easier for me
it's not so easy for them but still
maintain
the cultural trappings the celebrations
the festivals
and managed to incorporate those and
then
fairly enough they also of course want
to pick and choose about which aspects
of the tradition
they would preserve i would say for
example conceding to the other side here
they would not actually want to preserve
circumcision
male circumcision or female circumcision
but these people are
broadly open to being conservative
in relation to religious cultures so
that's a very
deep divide within atheism
and two subtly but profoundly different
groups of people
who are both using the name of atheism
but in the pursuit
of different objectives but still
maintain
the cultural trappings the celebrations
the festivals
and managed to incorporate those it's
syncretism again
but going in the other direction
incorporating those religious things
into a more secular basis and saying you
know what we can keep these things right
everybody enjoys them everybody enjoys
them everybody enjoys them
let's keep them on one level this is a
really really
shallow difference of opinion shallow
but important
and then there's a little bit more of a
profound
political point to be made and it's a
point that applies to both sides
this is not a situation where i'm right
and he's wrong
and on the shallow issue about to speak
on on cultural differences
there's no way one side can be right
and the other side can be wrong
how important is opera should the
government of canada
spend taxpayers money to maintain arts
such as
opera and the ballet
well if you're willing to accept the
incredibly
myopic self-centered view that this guy
does and just state as a fact
this culture is wonderful everyone
enjoys it
it's important it's valuable then of
course it's a very short leap to say
well then of course
taxpayers money should be spent to
preserve the opera
to make it possible for canadians in
downtown toronto
to go and see traditional european
culture like italian opera
and french and russian ballet let's say
i don't know exactly which traditions of
ballet they're preserving
maybe it's the czech ballet i don't know
um
that argument is really very very hard
to sustain
even jazz music it's a very small
percentage of canadians
who value jazz and our government
actually spends millions and millions of
dollars supporting jazz music and jazz
festivals
because it's considered some kind of
refined high culture
but of course it gets even more observed
when you start to ask
why are taxes being taken from everyone
you know the rich and the poor alike
to be spent on a type of culture that's
really only appreciated by a very
small minority of wealthy people so
one of the concepts he uses again and
again noel plum the guy i'm indirectly
debating with here
he just refers to my idea of culture as
drab
and he completely presumes that his idea
of culture
is colorful and entertaining and
wonderful
and is something that everyone enjoys
no not everyone enjoys
the opera not everyone enjoys
the ballet not everyone enjoys
jazz music for many of us sitting for
three hours through an opera
is a horrible experience and this is of
course
a secular example now um
at cambridge university england there's
a major
annual performance of the tadium there's
there are many major performances
throughout the year of
i was going to say carols of of
christian choir music
christian songs in this traditional
gothic architecture now i'm not in a
position to say
nobody enjoys that some people do and
some of the people who appreciate it
are atheists or secular people who get
dressed up and sit in a church
for hours of hearing songs about how
wonderful jesus is and how a wonderful
god is
but it doesn't take a lot of maturity to
recognize
there are some people who don't
appreciate that music
who don't want to sit and listen to that
for three hours and there are some
people
who really dislike it intensely there
are people who dislike
their tax dollars paying for this music
to perform
there are people who pay tuition to a
specific college within cambridge
and they don't like the fact that some
of their tuition dollars
are going to pay for this religious
ritual in a religious chapel
religious architecture maybe many
centuries own
there are questions here of saying wait
a minute it's not
merely that not everyone enjoys this
there's a real struggle going on for
what the present and future
of our culture ought to be now his
situation as a kind of
monolingual monocultural guy in england
it is different from the situation of
myself as an
ethnic jew in canada
do you expect me to celebrate the
culture of the british empire
in canada a culture that came to us
through genocide and conquest
a culture that you know for me as an
ethnic jew is always going to be a few
steps alien
from who my family were and my
background and so on
but it's even more alien when you're
looking at it in terms of the history of
yes yes y'all slavery and genocide and
conquest
and colonialism now by the same token i
would imagine
the significance of italian opera in
italy
is somewhat different than it is in
canada there are all kinds of
discussions we could have here
about government policy so on and so
forth
but this problem is not just as shallow
as saying well
some people like opera and some people
like don't some people don't
it's not just as shallow or simple as
saying well some people
want to go to this chapel in cambridge
university and hear the performance of
the tadium they want to hear christian
songs being sung
and some people don't uh there's a
deeper and broader
question here of institutional learning
so this is really the use of the word
learning that's used
in economics and of course it's invaded
the social sciences particularly
political science um
[Music]
how do people know in a particular city
that if they hang around city hall and
watch for the notices
of condemned properties being put up for
auction
they can make a lot of money the
practices of the state
the way people respond to authority the
way they can make
money out of you know the standard
operation
of bureaucracy and authority that's a
type of learning which is very rarely
or maybe even never taught in schools
and colleges
but people working within the real
estate industry
they learn all these things they learn
where
and when to go at city hall to get these
notices and find out what's going on
they know how to look up and find out
about zoning changes that can be worth
millions of dollars that knowledge
there's a whole network of learning that
goes on and of course it all
happens in the shadow of government
regulation and government enforcement
that these people who are making money
out of real estate for example
they know that if they break a law if
they break a zoning rule or something
it'll cost them a lot of money or maybe
even put them in prison
in the same way people develop attitudes
towards democracy bureaucracy authority
in the shadow of these institutions
there's a type of profound
learning that goes on at cambridge
university
which isn't just what happens in the
classroom
it what it's what happens through
precisely these rituals
these performances and people's
participation in them
i think there's a type of learning that
goes on if children grow up
really being told that the opera and the
ballet
are the pinnacle of our culture or the
are to be looked up at
as the glory of european civilization
and by some extent the glory of canadian
civilization to go to a university
where it is the tadium that's being
performed it's songs to the glory of the
christian god and jesus
and that that is what people dress up in
their finest clothes to go and do
that that's the celebration that will
punctuate
a very boring university experience for
many of these students
most the students i knew at cambridge
they had very little time and very
little money
they scurried back and forth between
crummy apartments
and the library they lived very harried
lives
and these ritual occasions um
they were major events in the lives of
those students and everything about
that performance and you know including
the architectural
setting including just the splendor and
and display of wealth that's involved if
you like
it's a contrast to the shoddiness
of their day-to-day lives living in and
out of a shoebox meeting with professors
in offices that look like a shoebox so
on and so forth
there is a type of learning here there
are attitudes towards authority and
society and so on and so forth
um that shape the way people behave the
shape the way they act
i do think that people going to
mecca and medina people participating
in the stoning of satan people
participating in sometimes
purely symbolic um you know theatrical
rituals i do think that shapes the
culture from top to bottom
in a way that's reflected in how do you
behave at city hall
how do you behave at parliament how do
you speak to authority figures how do
you treat police
and how to read how do the police treat
you
so this is something that for me goes
deeper and further
than just the question of whether or not
people enjoy
participating in those rituals but even
so
even on that shallower level i don't
think it's asking too much of the other
side to recognize
some of us some
hate what you love in culture
it's the most blatantly obvious thing
some people
hate going to the opera some people
hate having to sit through several hours
of reading of the torah at a synagogue
they hate it they don't want to be
forced to sit through it or they don't
want to do it
force might be too strong they don't
want to do it just to please their
grandmother or please their
wife or please some family or what have
you
there's this really strange deep
presumption that these festivals are
wonderful and as he says
everyone everyone appreciates them
compared to the quote unquote drab
alternative of getting rid of them from
your life you're telling me that your
method's going to work better
i don't think so because it's just drab
and dull i'm sorry i've never spoken to
a muslim atheist meaning here an
ex-muslim atheist i have never spoken to
even
one that said that they miss attending
prayers that they
miss attending lectures and listening to
the singing
i have never met even one who said that
they
they dearly wish they could participate
in the animal sacrifice elements the
sort of slaughter and sharing of meat
elements
or going back on the hajj or what have
you
it's a very very strange claim that i
think reflects
a really narrow really self-centered
white british perspective let me just
ask you directly noel
if you were born navajo indian
do you think you'd perceive this the
same way you do i was nervous
about studying god's word because of
past hurts
that i seen a lot of missionaries had
done to the native people
i realized that god made me this way for
a reason he gave my family for a reason
it's just something that you're born
into and when it came with denise
we encountered that a lot she had a lot
of penta
bad anger towards uh the christian
church because of some of the stuff that
they did to native americans um
in the name of jesus as i looked at her
as she was talking about god and reading
his word i
that moment i said you know what i want
that light i want that fire
i got closer to god then i could ever
imagine i was going to
bible studies every wednesday and i was
just reading the bible and it it changed
me i've seen god work some great
miracles
god's even spoken to me in my life he
found jesus
through science it brought him right
back to the creator of our earth
i don't think it's too exotic or too
bizarre
to ask that question what if you were a
black
indigenous person in australia what if
you were cree
or ojibwe or mohawk the british empire
invaded these places
destroyed the indigenous culture forced
them to stop practicing their own
religion and force them to attend
exactly these shitty boring
british religious rituals for hours and
hours and hours
and you're saying everyone loves them
everyone wants to continue with them
only a crazy grinch would be against
perpetuating and preserving these
cultural traditions
forever and ever well one some people
regard those traditions as oppressive
and some people who don't regard them as
oppressive
regard them as drab and boring
how easy it is it's too easy
to take up the cause
of atheism and skepticism
merely as an excuse for cheating on your
wife
and i'm sorry but that is part of what's
going on right now in 2018. oh
do you know that's a pretty high level a
high standard of
grubby behavior i lose some respect
for you when you say something like that
i just have to call [ __ ] on this no
no this is a real factor do you know
people
look do you just live on the internet my
father
was a devout christian and he did not
grow up in a christian family
his mother before him he was raised by a
single mother was not christian in any
way
my father was a devout profound
christian
he named like his first four sons
all really obvious biblical names
matthew
christian joel and adam okay he was
completely committed
to what he called uh christian
existentialism
he was sold on but guess what
he just could not commit to monogamy
for him really specifically the idea of
having
an open relationship an open marriage or
today people would use words like uh
polyamory they didn't have terms like
that back then so
he probably just called it swinging um
he was deeply committed to nudism and he
struggled with
being faithful or cheating on his wife
and that broke
his faith okay my father was a left-wing
extremist
he wasn't just a moderate communist
compared to other communists
he was an extremist that didn't break
the faith
that the christian religion and the
bible had on okay
cheating on his wife the desire to cheat
on his wife is what broke
it transformed his whole life and both
gay people and straight people go
through this
where struggling with their own
sexuality is what leads them to reject
religion
i think you're being an insincere piece
of crap by not dealing with this
you just want to act as if i'm not
raising something meaningful here
when i am no i have no statistics to
back it up because i think
nobody really wants to be honest and
come forward and talk about it the gay
community the trans community
those people will more openly talk about
how their sexuality led them to break
away from the church
um heterosexual men cheating on their
wives
less likely to be honest you're not even
satisfied with the
if you're not doing it my way you're not
atheisting right
no no you're going beyond that and just
to see asserting that anybody
that doesn't follow your lead has
nefarious ulterior motives no
that's not true i think this video will
be really too boring if i went through
point by point and after every single
point he made
just said no that's not true you're
misrepresenting my argument
he is step by step he's misrepresenting
my
argument at every step and i think he
just sincerely
isn't very bright and didn't pay much
attention
i don't think he has any ulterior
motives at all
and i don't describe negative ulterior
motives to people
who agree with him i would say that most
of the people who agree with him
haven't really thought this through
short
term or long term short term
for example i don't think they've really
thought it through
the impact it will have on their own
children if they have and raise children
if they raise those children with muslim
rituals
and muslim festivals if they raise their
children with
hindu customs hindu festivals
now atheists raising their children
in those traditions as he's endorsing as
he's supporting
you you can't imagine any short-term
problems with this
back in the day back when i was first on
the internet there was a support group
for secular jewish parents who were
horrified
that their own children had basically
converted to orthodox judaism
like they were jewish parents who
themselves were either atheists or like
agnostic and didn't take their religion
seriously but they maintained the
customs and rituals of judaism
and then one day they wake up and
they're astonished normally their kid as
a teenager
is in a sense rebelling against them by
going back to judaism by really taking
their religion seriously
if you maintain the outer husk
of the religion intact one of the very
clear dangers
is simply that the next generation is
gonna interpret
that religion in a manner that is more
traditional that is more
forceful that is more true to what's
actually written in the bible
what's actually written in the quran
even for religions like buddhism and
hinduism
so short term there are real concerns of
that kind and again
if you i don't know how much real world
experience this guy has if you know some
muslim families you'll know families
like that where they feel like
the older generation was this
cosmopolitan
secular muslim family and then they're
shocked that
maybe two generations on there are
younger people getting radicalized and
becoming to some extent fundamentalist
and returning to the roots of religion
well why did you raise your kids muslim
yeah you raised the muslim light you
raised them with a watered down
westernized version of islam
but guess what like all the components
of the bomb were set out on the dining
room table and all it took took was your
kid
to take this seriously assemble the
components and they've reassembled the
same ideology that's been so
potent it's been such a transformative
force in the world
for centuries the same elements of the
religion that appealed to people
powerfully
say one thousand years ago they can
still appeal
appeal to people powerfully today the
long-term problems
are even more bizarre is your theory
that
downtown montreal quebec should remain
dominated by cathedrals and christian
churches of various kinds
forever and ever and ever is your theory
that 200 years from now in the future
places like australia and canada and new
zealand
should devote taxpayers dollars to
maintaining and retrenching the
infrastructure the actual architecture
the institutions the festivals
the recitation of those songs forever
and ever and ever
or at some point does it stop
what if you lived in a society where
people celebrated the birthday
of adolf hitler all over the world
including within russia and within china
there are people who still celebrate the
birthdays of of joseph stalin
who celebrate mao zedong those
celebrations
those symbolic ritual events
they don't do harm in themselves they
don't
hurt people directly however
they demonstrate who you really are
regular viewers of this channel will be
very familiar with what i'm getting at
in that clip
and it's so clearly explained in the
video he quoted from there i mean
obviously he cuts short
i'm not complaining but it does not take
a lot of intelligence
to fill in the conclusion to even what
you just heard there in black and white
in only so many words
okay the next step of the argument is to
say
look when someone wears a t-shirt with a
swastika
let's just even say a t-shirt that
specifically approves of adolf hitler
the problem is not that the t-shirt is
doing harm
the problem is not that the t-shirt
kills people the t-shirt doesn't travel
back in time and kill millions of people
it doesn't directly harm people today
however a human being wearing that
t-shirt
they have revealed to me something about
themselves
the t-shirt helps me understand who you
are
if you're wearing that t-shirt that
leads me to assume
that you are the kind of person who
either approves of what adolf hitler did
in the past
or who even would approve of something
similar today
politically racially what have you
okay when i meet people which happens
more often
who are wearing a t-shirt that shows
joseph stalin
or mao zedong and that is proclaiming
that they support
communism okay the t-shirt doesn't do
any harm
but it reveals something to me about you
about your mentality
about your values about your ethics
it reveals a present tense political
problem
that is still unfolding so if i meet
someone
in canada who's wearing a t-shirt that
says that they support the anglican
church
and the genocide the anglican church
carried out in canada if i met someone
who was wearing a t-shirt
that specifically approved of the
pogroms against jewish people
or forcing jewish people to live in a
ghetto this is medieval europe we're
talking about here not the nazi period
if you ever met someone who's actually
wearing the symbols
showing that yes they approve of this
tradition they approve of this history
they approve of this ideology then that
presents a problem in the present tense
and you know what the good news is most
of the people who are wearing
t-shirts that show mao zedong show a
communist leader
they actually are ignorant of what it is
they're endorsing
most of the people who wear a christian
cross are ignorant of what the history
of the church is
and if they can be enlightened if they
can learn more about the history of that
church of what those symbols mean
of what was so terribly wrong with that
history then they're probably going to
change
what at least how they're expressing
their faith or religion
and they may actually change their
attitude towards
the political history of europe in the
past the present
the future what decisions they want to
make to have a secular society as
opposed to a theocracy
here and now so this somewhat staggering
false equivalence
of of celebrating hitler's birthday with
celebrating
um the modern instantiation of christmas
everything he says from this point
forward is complete nonsense
that there's no point responding to this
was his initial reaction to me
on twitter and it's the reaction that
carries on and on in this youtube video
which is just him having a connection
because he
he's freaked out by the comparison
between
christianity and nazi ideology
but it's not sufficient to understand
that i am making
such a comparison you have to understand
the allegory
and the purpose the allegory is put to
so i do not subscribe to a current
left-wing notion
of symbolic violence okay i don't
subscribe to that
i'm spelling out for you precisely what
it is i think the problem is
with the symbolic celebration of
or respect paid to an ideology like
communism
an ideology like the third reich in
germany
or an ideology like christianity maybe
especially in the context of canada the
united states and australia
where the genocide was committed right
there
by and for this ideology now i don't
think it takes
a huge amount of intellect to understand
the point i'm making
the point is not that hitler and jesus
are the same
the point is not that hitler and santa
claus are the same
those are outrageously stupid
childishly stupid misinterpretations
of both what i said and why i'm saying
it
i'm spelling out for you why it is that
the employment
of these symbols has real political
importance here and now
and i'm not subscribing to a
stereotypical left-wing approach of
claiming
symbolic violence or complain
complaining that like speech is violence
or that you're oppressing me by wearing
that t-shirt or that i'm oppressed
by the fact that people at cambridge
university are going to attend christian
church services paid for
by my tuition i don't see things that
simplistically
but on the other hand when you using
these clear examples
you have a sense of why it's disturbing
why you detect that there's something
wrong when people are wearing t-shirts
approving of adolf hitler and joseph
stalin
okay that symbolic significance
that's there for me also when in the
21st century
people are providing even symbolic
recognition to
god almighty jesus christ etc etc
christmas has a very very different um
role within our society than
celebrations of hitler's birthday
how would i view somebody who celebrated
hitler's birthday i'd view
them with suspicion right because it's
not a normal thing
to celebrate i would assume
that if you celebrated hitler's birthday
that you had sympathies for hitler
as he says though it says something
about you yes it would in that instance
you really don't have to go out on a
limb to celebrate christmas
it tells me next to nothing about what
you believe
that you celebrate christmas do you
think that would be true
if you were living among the cree and
ojibwe of saskatchewan
indigenous people in canada you know
what it actually tells me
a lot about you in that cultural context
whether you celebrate christmas or
whether you refuse to
because you correctly perceived the
anglican church and the catholic church
as responsible for the genocide and
overall destruction of your people
over decades and decades but leading up
to and including like the 1980s it's not
ancient history for those people
it's not at all do you think it tells me
something significant about you
if you celebrate christmas in cambodia
where i used to live and work by the way
if you celebrate christmas in vien chen
the capital city of laos
all places i've known all places
everywhere don't you think it tells you
something significant about you
let's just say right now in laos if you
either
refuse all religion if you embrace the
religion of the french empire that
previously conquered
laos and set up you know catholic
missionary outfits there and
catholic temples or or if you reject
both buddhism and catholicism and you
subscribe to some kind of marxist
materialist
you know atheism yeah you know what it
tells me a lot about you
in all of these contexts the one
exception
is you because you live in such a narrow
minded
white bred echo chamber that it can't
even [ __ ] occur to you
that yes noel it tells me a lot about
your lilly white british ass
that you don't question christmas that
you're
not willing to question the centrality
of this ritual of this song and dance
of this tradition you can question other
traditions
but not your own you can't even question
that
some people not everybody not everybody
likes the anglican church
not everybody likes your [ __ ]
cultural values
just as not everybody likes the opera
and not everybody likes the ballet
not everybody likes christmas not
everybody likes sitting in church pews
and listen to the tdm being worse
bursted but in the political context of
the 21st century
now more than ever you've got to look
around and ask
what does atheism mean to you what does
it mean to us
and what is the future we're building in
this case
genuinely i think that noel has a valid
definition
of atheism that's just completely
different from mine
the vision of atheism that he spells out
at length in the video as a whole
when he's not just insulting me or
misinterpreting and misrepresenting what
i said
the vision of atheism that he spells out
is
in a word reformed christianity
that's what he wants he doesn't want a
secular society
he doesn't want one day in the future to
walk through the streets of paris
and not see cathedrals he wants the
cathedrals to be there
forever and ever 200 years 40 years five
years he doesn't want
one day in the future to walk through
mecca and medina
and not see people celebrating uh
throwing stones at satan and uh going
around in a circle around the cabin
touching the magical stone from heaven
the uh
this asteroid fragment you know oh no
all from his perspective all of those
traditions can continue forever and ever
without end
he fundamentally doesn't see a problem
with them he just wants
a reformation of religion so that it
more suits his 21st century
secular sentiments and that's fine i
actually regard that as a legitimate
definition
of atheism it's just one that's
completely different from mine
the form of atheism i'm interested in
would
actually aim at in future separation of
church and state
something we don't have in canada people
sure as
[ __ ] don't have in saudi arabia and a
lot of countries around the world but we
don't even have it in canada
i would want a form of secularism a form
of atheism that is
actually pursuing a future in which
these religious
practices cease to exist and yes of
course
circumcision is way more egregious than
the celebration of christmas
in terms of priorities of course getting
rid of circumcision
it should be a higher priority but in
terms of the difference you
can make in your own life and for the
life of your children
getting christmas out of your life and
replacing it with something meaningful
and something beautiful
that's something you can do i focus on
the difference i can make in the world
i'm completely powerless to oppose the
catholic church
even in cambodia even in laos countries
where the catholic church
is relatively powerless compared to i
don't know italy or france
okay i'm completely powerless to oppose
circumcision even in the united states
of america
a country where the circumcision lobby
is less powerful than it is
in saudi arabia or indonesia okay
circumcision mainstream decision
huge issue in all these countries okay
it would take a huge amount of money
an organization of huge numbers of
people and decades of hard work
to even make a dent on the circumcision
issue
and that's why it's really worth talking
about the difference you can make for
yourself and others here and now
within your lifetime by engaging in
positive
cultural production okay he says some
really snarky backhanded insulting
things like oh whoa
i hope your christmas celebration goes
well you're not you're not the first
person he says i'm just like the
jehovah's witnesses
giving my kid a miserable celebration
and refusing to participate in christmas
no no no i'm not like the jehovah's
witnesses you know what i taught my
daughter that christmas
which yeah i had to block people on the
internet because i went to france and
then 24 7 for the short period of time i
had custom my daughter
we made christmas cookies with all this
stuff but you know what we did
we replaced christmas with sock mus we
told her the story of socrates
okay you know you know what the
difference is between jesus and socrates
jesus stood up for what he believed in
was executed for what he believed in
socrates stood up for what he believed
in was executed for him well for one
thing socrates was a real person not a
mythological character that's a
significant difference but you know what
the other difference is
what they believed in one of the reasons
why socrates was put on trial and
executed
was that he taught in his school that
thunder and lightning are
not controlled by zeus thunder and
lightning
are natural phenomena created and
controlled by the clouds
he actively through discourse and logic
and through his teaching
taught people that it was a custom and a
superstition
to believe that thunder and lightning
were controlled by zeus that you could
pray to zeus and control those things
that in fact they were natural phenomena
controlled by the clouds that ultimately
the con
the clouds were controlled by the vortex
of winds in the sky so on and so forth
okay
he was willing to stand up for that
principle be put on trial
and die for it in his own society
he was considered a heretic because he
was
a secular activist an atheist activist
after his own fashion in his own deeply
imperfect way
critique of socrates would be a separate
video to make okay
we made christmas cookies but the man
with a white beard wearing a white toga
on those cookies
wasn't santa claus it was socrates that
was a meaningful story i could share
with my daughter
we had a wonderful sock mess and we had
to sit down and explain to her
yeah you know those buildings were
walking past from the street those are
churches
but they aren't made for people like us
our history as ethnic
jews which is what my daughter is by
blood she's jewish the same way i am
she's gonna have to deal with
anti-semitism her whole life the same
way i did
you know what those buildings were made
by this religion that persecuted our
people
in fact ultimately they're the reason
why several million of us are now
missing and aren't in europe anymore
today where they aren't here in france
they aren't here in germany so on and so
forth yeah you know what that's a
terrible bloody violent history
that excludes and oppresses us so i'm
not gonna make cookies
celebrating them and their religion i'm
not gonna wear a trinket around my neck
or a t-shirt
that says i'm on their team because i'm
not
i'm working for the eventual abolition
of christianity
in canada united states and europe and
the progress i can make towards that
although tiny although minuscule can at
least
be sincere i wish more people like you
noel
would at least share in that sincerity
and maybe together
step by step we could make a lot more
progress